Imagine for a moment that you're going on a trip.
The tickets are a gift.
A friend has paid the price.
All you have to do is pack your bags and get to the airport.
Now, as you know, packing isn't easy.
And dragging heavy bags around the airport is exhausting.
Remember the days before luggage had wheels?
How did we do that?
Heavy baggage can make even a vacation seem like a burden.
Well, the point is this.
You and I have set out on an exciting journey, a journey to God's new world.
The trip is free.
The ransom paid the price.
All we have to do is get there.
And that's the hard part, right?
And why?
Because each one of us is carrying some type of heavy baggage on this journey.
Now, it's true our life is blessed.
As Isaiah 65-13 says, figuratively,
we're eating and drinking while the world goes hungry and thirsty.
Still, Acts 14-22 says we must enter the kingdom of God through many tribulations.
We have anxieties.
And Proverbs 12-25 says, anxiety in the heart can weigh it down.
The heavy baggage we carry can make even the journey to God's new world seem like a burden.
Well, the good news is we have help.
Open your Bible to 1 Kings 8 verses 38 and 39.
Here Solomon prayed on behalf of Jehovah's people at the inauguration of the temple.
And what he said in that prayer can help us put wheels on our baggage so it's easier for us to carry.
At 1 Kings 8, beginning with verse 38,
Solomon says to Jehovah,
whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel.
For each one knows the plague of his own heart.
When they spread out their hands toward this house,
then may you hear from the heavens your dwelling place.
And may you forgive and take action.
Now let's stop there.
Notice that phrase, each one knows the plague of his own heart.
In stating that, Solomon wasn't referring to the nation as a whole.
He was referring to private suffering.
The baggage each person had to carry.
The problems no one else might know about.
And although Solomon evidently had a specific type of plague in mind,
one that required forgiveness, by extension his words can apply to any anxiety that weighs us down.
For example, chapter 2 of the God's love book,
applies Solomon's words to a personal weakness we might struggle with.
The May 1st, 2010 watchtower applies it to the grief a person feels after losing a mate.
The point is, any anxiety that weighs us down can be considered a plague of the heart.
What is the plague of your heart?
What anxiety weighs you down on your journey to God's new world?
Whatever baggage we carry, the scripture we just read confirms that we have help.
Notice Solomon prayed that Jehovah would not only hear from the heavens,
but also take action if not to eliminate our load than at least to help us carry it.
For the rest of this discussion, we'll see how Jehovah can do that.
In three situations, one, when circumstances discourage us.
Two, when people upset us.
And three, when negative emotions overwhelm us.
In all situations, Jehovah can help us cope with the plague of our heart.
Let's see how.
First, when circumstances discourage us.
Now, when it comes to circumstances, life is unpredictable.
And this system, things can change just like that with one phone call, one accident, one diagnosis.
Let me tell you about Annie, who was diagnosed at age 19 with pulmonary fibrosis.
And at first, she felt this was completely unfair.
Annie says pulmonary fibrosis affects heavy smokers.
And I had never had a cigarette in my life.
I was depressed. I wouldn't eat.
And I wouldn't talk to people.
I would just lie in bed and think about how miserable my life was.
Now, Annie is one of Jehovah's witnesses.
And she was one when she got sick.
She understood the real cause of her illness.
And she knew about the new world.
Still, this discouraging circumstance threw Annie off course.
She says, I prayed and prayed and prayed about it.
But it felt like I was just talking to the wall.
Now, regardless of our age, we may relate to Annie's comment.
When any of us face a discouraging circumstance, we pray about it repeatedly.
And if nothing changes, we may wonder whether Jehovah cares about or even sees what we're going through.
A discouraging circumstance can become a plague of our heart.
How can we cope with it?
Well, let's look at 2 Corinthians 12 verses 7 through 9.
Here the Apostle Paul faced a discouraging circumstance.
One that he calls a thorn in the flesh.
Now, as you realize, we don't know what that thorn was.
It might have been a physical affliction.
Whatever it was, as we read these verses, try to detect two things.
One, what Paul could not control.
And two, what he could control.
Second Corinthians 12, beginning with verse 7.
To keep me from becoming overly exalted.
I was given a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan, to keep slapping me so that I might not be overly exalted.
Three times I begged the Lord about this that it would depart from me.
But he said to me, my undeserved kindness is sufficient for you, for my power is being made perfect in weakness.
Now, let's stop there and look at our two components.
First, what couldn't Paul control?
Well, the answer is obvious.
The circumstance itself, his thorn in the flesh, Paul even prayed about it three times, but nothing changed.
The circumstance was beyond his control.
What could Paul control?
His response.
And part of that response was to accept the reality of a situation.
To the point that he says in verse 9, most gladly, I will boast about my weaknesses.
Once Paul realized that his thorn would not be removed, he didn't waste time doubting God's love or asking why me or comparing himself to others who seem to have an easier life.
No, Paul accepted reality.
He viewed his thorn as an angel of Satan, and he got about the business of endurance.
Now, Paul's experience gives us a key to coping with any discouraging circumstance.
First, break it down into two components.
One, what we can't control, and two, what we can.
And often, like Paul, what we can control is our response.
That is a choice.
When we face a discouraging circumstance, we could choose to become bitter about life, angry at God.
We could even let it stumble us, some have.
Or we could choose a better response.
Like Paul, a better response usually involves first accepting the reality of the situation.
Now, at first that might sound cold, but accepting reality is vital.
Why?
Page 7 of the April 2014 awake says this.
By learning to accept what you cannot change, you are more likely to look for ways to cope with the situation.
You start to take a measure of control of what seems to be an uncontrollable situation.
Now, Harold King is an example of that.
As you know, he was imprisoned for his faith, confined to a four and a half by nine-foot cell,
Brother King certainly couldn't control his circumstance.
But he could control his response.
Once Brother King accepted the reality of his situation, he thought of things that he could control.
Things that even prison walls could not prevent him from doing.
For example, he prayed.
He memorized scriptures.
He wrote kingdom songs.
He celebrated the memorial right there in his cell alone.
He even went out in service by creating imaginary householders.
Once Brother King accepted reality, he was able to take a measure of control of what seemed to be an uncontrollable situation.
Now, a brother whose wife was diagnosed with cancer relates how they did something similar.
They couldn't control the disease, but what could they do?
Quoted in the August 2011 awake.
The husband says, we decided that at regular intervals, we would not talk about the cancer for a whole day.
Instead, we focused on the positive aspects of our life.
It was like taking a vacation from the disease.
Regularly, we had a cancer-free day.
Now, that's how this couple took a measure of control.
Others might choose a different method, but again, the point is this.
Once we accept reality, we're more likely to find ways to cope with the situation and to even take a measure of control over it.
But as accepting reality, all we can do.
No, there's something more.
The article learning to live with the unchangeable in the March 15th, 1978 watchtower suggests this.
In whatever state or condition you might find yourself.
Look for its compensations or mercies.
That's exactly what Paul did in connection with his thorn.
For example, look back at 2 Corinthians 12.
In verse 7, twice Paul says that his thorn kept him from becoming overly exalted.
Humility. That's one compensation.
In verse 9, Paul says God's power is made perfect in weakness.
Increased reliance on Jehovah.
That's a second compensation.
Here's a third. Let's look at Philippians 4.11.
Now, Philippians was written about five or six years after Paul wrote to the Corinthians about his thorn in the flesh.
So that thorn may have been one of the things on Paul's mind as he wrote what we're about to read.
Philippians 4.11, second part of the verse.
Paul says, I have learned to be self-sufficient or, according to the footnote, content regardless of my circumstances.
Now, with these words, Paul expresses a vital truth that contentment, even happiness, does not depend on having ideal circumstances.
You know, sometimes we talk as if it does.
We say things like, I'll be happy when I get a better work assignment or I'll be happy when I get married.
I'll be happy when I get a better room.
I'll be happy when I get a better roommate.
The idea is, I'll only be happy when my circumstances change.
It's been said that people who think that way, strive and strive, but never arrive.
Because as soon as they get that circumstance that was supposed to make them happy, another obstacle looms up and their discontent again.
Paul chose to be content despite his circumstances.
And notice he says in verse 11, I have learned this.
Contentment might not have been his default position.
Perhaps like many of us, Paul had a tendency to veer towards negativity when confronted with a trial.
But Paul learned to be content, even when his repeated prayers for relief were not answered the way he would have liked.
In fact, we could summarize the lesson, Paul learned this way.
Don't let the blessing you're praying for blind you to the compensations and mercies you have.
You know, sometimes when we're going through a trial, we tend to narrow the focus of our prayers by in effect telling Jehovah how we expect to be blessed.
And yet, Jehovah may already be giving us compensations and mercies that we haven't considered.
That's what Annie, the sister with pulmonary fibrosis, came to learn.
Remember how she said, I prayed and prayed and prayed, but it felt like I was just talking to the wall.
Annie also admits, at first I was even mad at Jehovah for not helping me in the way I wanted to be helped.
How did Annie come to see compensations and mercies even in the midst of a serious illness?
Here's what she says, my dad opened my eyes.
While I was so upset at Jehovah, my dad wouldn't stop praying to him and thanking him and talking about how good Jehovah had been to me.
I had just been through the worst months of my life and my dad was thanking Jehovah for what I asked him.
He told me, you have no idea how expensive your medicine was and I wasn't even working.
Somehow we managed to get everything we needed.
There was always food in the house.
Brothers kept coming to make sure we were eating.
Jehovah gave us the strength to keep going and not give up.
And then Annie's dad told her this, just because Jehovah didn't help you the way you wanted to be helped,
doesn't mean he didn't do it.
In essence, her dad was saying, don't let the blessing you're praying for blind you to the compensations and mercies you have.
Annie now says, Jehovah helps us in ways we can't see it first because we're so overwhelmed by what we're going through.
But I've learned that Jehovah has a way of doing things and his way is always better than my way.
We can adopt a similar viewpoint.
If we can see the compensations and mercies in our situation, then we'll be better able to cope with a circumstance that has become a plague of our heart.
So to review, how can the Apostle Paul's example lighten our load when a discouraging circumstance is weighing us down?
First, accept the reality of the situation that may open our minds to practical ways to deal with it.
Second, look for compensations and mercies. Don't let the blessing you're praying for blind you to the blessings you have.
Those two suggestions can help us cope with a discouraging circumstance that has become a plague of our heart.
Now let's move on to our second point of when people upset us.
The minister will call Helen has been pioneering for six years. She serves as a construction volunteer.
She helped out for an extended period on the warwick project.
Needless to say, Helen has been around a lot of people and Jehovah's people and that's a blessing.
But Helen admits that at times it's also been a test. Why?
She says, one of my greatest weaknesses is a critical eye toward others.
Rarely do I have a good first impression of a person.
It's always tainted by some negative observation.
At first, even the best of people seem too quick to laugh, too popular, even too spiritual.
It's a terrible, ugly weakness I have.
Now, perhaps we can relate to Helen's comment.
We might tend to get annoyed or even hold a grudge when someone says or does the wrong thing.
And we think that tendency will change when we come to Bethel, right?
Finally, I'll be around people who are easy to get along with.
And then at some point, whether it's after a few months or a few minutes, the bubble bursts and now we're not sure whether the brotherhood is a blessing from Jehovah or a test from Satan.
How can we cope with that when people upset us?
Well, let's look at Romans 12-18.
And as we read Romans 12-18, try to detect two things.
Number one, what we can't control and number two, what we can control.
Romans 12-18 says, if possible, as far as it depends on you, be peaceable with all men.
Now, let's look at our two components.
First, what can't we control?
What others say or do?
That part depends on them.
What can we control?
Again, it's our response.
That is a choice.
When someone upsets us, we can choose to let it grow or we can choose to let it go.
We can choose to be peaceable with all men.
That part, Romans 12-18 says, depends on each one of us.
So how can we choose to be peaceable when someone upsets us?
Well, let's look at Judges 8-2.
This shows us one thing we can do.
Judges 8-2, here Gideon avoided what could have turned out to be a messy conflict.
You remember the story.
Gideon and his army had just won a battle against Midian.
And at that point, the tribe of Ephraim starts complaining.
Now, even though they were eventually called into the battle,
and even though they captured two Midianite princes,
the Ephraimites felt that they should have been called in sooner.
And they blamed this all on Gideon.
Judges 8-1 says they quarreled bitterly with him about this.
So now there's a conflict.
How did Gideon handle it?
Notice what he says to the tribe of Ephraim at Judges 8-2.
What have I done compared with you?
Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the great harvest of Abbeezer?
What does that last question mean?
Well, Gideon was from the family of Abbeezer.
So what he's saying to the Ephraimites is,
the grapes that your tribe leaves behind
are better than the best grapes my family can grow.
And then he reminds the Ephraimites that they had an important role in the battle.
And again, he asked them,
what have I done compared with you?
Verse 3 says after that,
the Ephraimites calm down.
Problem solved.
And how?
What did Gideon do here?
In the face of a conflict with the Ephraimites,
he did not put them down.
He raised them up.
He found something good about them.
In this case, they're great harvest,
something totally unrelated to the conflict.
And for the sake of peace,
he praised them for it.
Now, we can take a similar approach.
When someone upsets us,
look for the great harvest.
Even if it's just to ourselves,
we can find something good about the person.
Perhaps something totally unrelated to the conflict we're having.
Now, that's what Helen,
this is where I quoted earlier,
is trying to do.
She says,
for every bad thought I have toward a person,
I try to make myself find something good about them.
When I take that step back,
it's easier for me to get to know a person
from a loving standpoint.
We can do the same thing.
When someone upsets us,
take that step back.
Look for the great harvest.
Find the good in that person.
That's the first thing we can do.
Now, a second thing we can do
is identify the Galatians chapter 2.
Let's look at that.
And before we read from this chapter,
Galatians 2, consider this question,
who are we most likely to get upset at?
Probably someone who wrongs us, wouldn't you think?
But, you know, there's one type of person
we might be even more prone to get upset at.
You know who it is?
Not someone who wrongs us,
but someone who writes us
by giving us correction when we need it.
And, Galatians 2, we're going to see an example of that.
Here, Peter was given correction,
and he needed it.
But notice how the correction was given.
And then we'll see why, in this case,
it might have been exceptionally hard
for Peter to accept it.
At Galatians chapter 2, verse 11,
Paul writes, however, when Cephas,
that's Peter, came to Antioch,
I resisted him face to face
because he was clearly in the wrong.
Paul is upset at Peter, and why?
In verse 12, he tells us,
for before certain men from James arrived,
those were Jewish Christians,
Peter used to eat with people of the nations.
But when they arrived, he stopped doing this
and separated himself,
fearing those of the circumcised class.
And what's Paul saying here,
that Peter would change how he acted,
depending on who was watching.
And Paul called him out on this.
He says, I resisted Peter face to face.
And then in verse 14, Paul really gives it to Peter.
He tells him straight out, you act one way
when the Jewish Christians are watching
and another way when their backs are turned.
In verse 13, Paul calls this a pretense,
or as the footnote renders it,
hypocrisy.
Imagine, Paul is calling Peter a hypocrite.
And he does this, not privately,
but before them all, verse 14 says,
can this get any worse?
Yes. And it did.
Under inspiration,
Paul wrote about this incident
in his letter to the Galatians,
which we just read from.
Now to make a comparison.
Today, internet messages spread from one person to the next.
And when a message circulates rapidly and widely,
people say it went viral.
And they didn't have the internet in the first century, of course.
But they did have letters,
and letters circulated.
And this one, Galatians,
did more than just circulate from one person to the next,
or even one congregation to the next.
No. Under Jehovah's Supervision,
this one ended up in the Bible.
Billions of copies down through the centuries,
still being printed,
translated into thousands of languages.
Now the whole world can read about Peter's hypocrisy,
as we just did.
Now the Bible doesn't tell us,
Peter's immediate reaction.
Initially, he may have been upset at Paul for all we know.
But in the end,
Peter chose to be peaceable.
How do we know that?
Well, in his second letter,
which was written about 12 to 14 years later,
Peter called Paul our beloved brother.
And he even said that Paul had God-given wisdom.
That's his second Peter 3.15.
So in the end,
Peter looked up to Paul,
and for good reason,
as he acknowledged,
Paul had God-given wisdom
to see not only into Scripture,
but also into people.
He could even see into Peter.
And instead of viewing that as a threat,
Peter saw it as a benefit.
And that's because he chose to be peaceable.
Now you and I can do the same.
In fact, we need to.
Why?
Because from time to time,
each one of us will encounter a Paul.
Someone who gives us correction that we need to hear.
But it comes to us in blunt terms,
perhaps at a most inappropriate time,
and it stings.
And sometimes the counsel that stings the most
is also the counsel we need the most.
If, like Peter, we choose to be peaceable,
we'll be able to take it.
Not only when someone wrongs us,
but also when someone writes us
by giving us needed correction.
Let's be honest, though.
It's tough to do that.
We can be so hypersensitive at times.
And no wonder.
We live in a world where
it's just common to blame someone else for our mistakes.
If someone breaks something,
it's the manufacturer's fault
for not making it unbreakable.
A speeding ticket?
That's the policeman's fault
because he had to meet a quota.
If a child fails English,
it's the teacher's fault
for not teaching English good enough,
or well enough.
In this world,
correction is largely viewed as an insult,
not as a teaching tool.
But God's Word does not support the world's view.
The Bible tells us of people
that stayed in or went out of God's favor,
depending on how they responded to counsel.
So if we choose to remain bitter
at the person who corrected us,
we need to remember this.
We are letting our upset emotions
have far too much power over us.
Resentment is heavy baggage
that will only add to our load
on our journey to God's new world.
And who needs that?
Instead, we need to be peaceable.
Not only when we're wronged,
but also when we're righted
through correction.
So to review,
how can we lighten our load
when someone upsets us?
First, like Gideon,
look for the great harvest.
Find something good about the person.
Second, like Peter,
be willing to accept correction
regardless of the manner in which it's given.
Those two suggestions can lighten our load
when people upset us.
Now let's move on to our third and final point,
when negative emotions overwhelm us.
As imperfect humans,
we are prone to have a distorted view of ourselves.
A few might think more of themselves
than necessary as Romans 12-3 says.
But others have the opposite problem,
thinking too little of themselves,
played with feelings of worthlessness.
When they look at themselves,
what they see is a gross
misrepresentation of reality
as if viewing themselves
in a distorted, fun house mirror.
For example, one witness quoted
in the September 15, 2014 watchtower said this.
When I think about everything I've done wrong,
it can make me feel
as if there's no way anyone can ever love me,
not even Jehovah.
Another quoted in the January 2006 awake said this,
I knew that Jehovah had forgiven me from my mistakes,
but I did not want him to.
I wanted to suffer because I hated myself so much.
While I knew that Jehovah could never have conceived
of a place like Christendom's hell,
I wanted him to invent one just for me.
Now as these examples illustrate,
our emotions, which ironically Jehovah created,
to enhance our love and our worship,
can sometimes turn against us
and make us feel condemned.
And that does more than just hinder our joy.
It also hinders our ability
to give Jehovah full glory
for the magnitude of his love.
So how can we cope with negative emotions
that at times overwhelm us?
Well, let's look at Romans 7, 22 to 25.
Now here the Apostle Paul describes negative emotions
that at times overwhelmed him.
And as we read these verses, try to detect two things.
One, what Paul could not control
and two, what he could control.
Romans 7 beginning with verse 22.
I really delight in the law of God,
according to the man I am within.
But I see in my body another law
warring against the law of my mind
and leading me captive to sin's law
that is in my body.
Miserable man that I am.
Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death?
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Now let's identify our two components.
First, what couldn't Paul control?
Occasional feelings of self-doubt.
Which Paul said made him feel miserable.
What could he control?
Once again, it's his response.
And Paul's response is right there in verse 25.
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Here Paul gives us the first key
to coping with negative emotions.
Meditate on the ransom.
Make it a personal study project if necessary.
Collect scriptures from the Bible
and material from our publications
that build up appreciation
for what Jesus' death means,
not just to the world of mankind in general,
but to each one of us as an individual.
Meditating on the ransom can help us cope
with negative emotions.
And why?
Because as the April 1st, 1995 watchtower says,
and I quote,
Christ's ransom sacrifice is the most potent answer
to the satanic lie that we are worthless or unlovable.
Let's think about that statement.
Why does it call the idea that we are worthless or unlovable,
not just a lie, but a satanic lie?
Well, who really profits when we believe
that we're unlovable to Jehovah?
Who really benefits when we wallow
in thoughts of self-condination?
Whose purpose is really served
when our emotions plague us
to the extent that we feel like giving up?
Obviously it's Satan.
And consider the irony of that.
Who really has proved himself unworthy of Jehovah's love?
Him. Who really is beyond Jehovah's forgiveness?
Him. Who really does the ransom not apply to?
Him.
And yet now,
in one of his greatest crafty acts
as Ephesians 6.11 calls it,
Satan tries to throw all those feelings of condemnation
that he deserves on you and on me.
The ransom gives us permission
to throw off that heavy baggage.
Evidently, that's what Paul did.
Yes, at times he felt miserable
about himself as we read at Romans 7.24.
But he also wrote at Galatians 2.20,
I lived my faith in the Son of God who loved me
and handed himself over for me.
Now, in stating that,
Paul wasn't being egotistical
or thinking more of himself than necessary.
He simply understood a basic scriptural truth
that Christ died for sinners,
not for perfect people.
The fact that Paul was so keenly aware
of his imperfections was evidence
that he was the very kind of person
that Jesus gave his life for.
The ransom helped Paul refute
any feelings of self-doubt
and it can do the same for us.
Again, the April 1st 1995 watchtower
expresses that thought beautifully.
It says, if life in this system
has taught you to see yourself
as an obstacle to daunting
even for God's immense love to surmount
or your sins is too vast
even for the death of his precious son to cover.
You have been taught a lie,
reject such lies with all the repugnance
that they deserve.
Isn't that what we do with all of Satan's other lies?
Do we accept the doctrine of the Trinity?
No.
Do we believe in hellfire?
Do we believe that life evolved?
No.
Do we believe that we are unlovable
and worthless to Jehovah?
Our answer to that question should be no.
And it should be just as decisive
as our no to the other questions.
And why?
Because the idea that we are worthless
or unlovable to Jehovah
is a false doctrine.
And we need to reject it just as firmly
as we would reject any of Satan's other
God dishonoring lies.
Meditating on the ransom can help us do that.
But besides meditating on the ransom,
there's something else we can do
to cope with negative emotions.
Let's look at Psalm 61 verse 2.
What David prayed for in this verse
presents us with another key
to dealing with negative emotions,
including feelings of worthlessness.
At Psalm 61 verse 2,
David says to Jehovah,
from the ends of the earth,
I will cry out to you
when my heart is in despair.
Leave me on to a rock
that is higher than I am.
Here, Jehovah, David,
is asking Jehovah for a different view
in elevated one.
And that's what we need
when negative emotions plague us.
As David wrote,
we need to be placed on a rock
that is higher than ourselves,
higher than our imperfect
and distorted reasoning.
Now, scriptural truths can help us do that.
For example,
when the heart is in despair as David wrote,
we may feel that no one can love us,
not even Jehovah.
But the elevated view from the rock
reveals a scriptural truth.
Romans 8.38 and 39.
Nothing can separate us from God's love.
When the heart is in despair,
we feel that our mistakes
are too great for Jehovah to forgive.
But the elevated view from the rock
reveals a scriptural truth.
Romans 5.8,
why we were yet sinners Christ died for us.
As we mentioned before,
Jesus died for sinners,
not for perfect people.
When the heart is in despair,
we can't picture ourselves in paradise
because in our heart,
we feel condemned.
But the elevated view
from the rock reveals a scriptural truth.
1 John 3.20,
God is greater than our hearts
and He knows all things,
including the reasons
why we might tend to think
so negatively of ourselves.
The point is,
gradually, we can replace
lowly negative thoughts
with elevated scriptural truths.
And we just mentioned three of those truths.
Here's one more.
Let's look at Malachi 3.17.
Now, in its application,
Malachi 3 is talking
about Jehovah's spiritual temple.
But in principle,
this first shows us the high value
of places on his people.
Malachi 3.17 says,
and they will be mine,
says Jehovah of Armies.
In the day when I produce
a special property,
or as the footnote renders it,
a treasured possession,
let's stop there.
Notice how proudly
Jehovah talks about his people.
He says they will be mine.
He even calls his people
special property.
And make no mistake.
That term is thrown into the Bible
just to make us feel good,
or to give us empty praise.
No, Jehovah's people
are special to him.
And why?
Because he produced this property,
we just read.
In other words, Jehovah
is cultivating in each one of us
the very spiritual qualities
that make us special to him.
So again, going back to Psalm
61, too,
when the heart is in despair,
as David wrote,
we may only see our failings
and imperfections.
But the elevated view from the rock
reveals a scriptural truth.
Malachi 3.17,
we are a special property
to Jehovah,
despite our flaws.
And if it's difficult for us
to accept that,
we are a special person
who sets the standard
for what's special here.
Not us.
One sister who had an extremely
negative view of herself
was helped a reason on that.
She says,
a spiritually mature sister
helped me to look at myself realistically
as an imperfect human
with strengths and weaknesses.
No better or worse
than any other brother or sister
that no one comes to Jehovah
without being drawn by his spirit.
That's John 644.
So Jehovah must see
something lovable in me
and who was I
to despise what Jehovah loves.
And notice how this sister
is slowly moving away
from that distorted mirror
and coming to see herself
the way Jehovah does.
We can do the same.
Is it easy?
Absolutely not.
The question 4 talks about
strongly entrenched things
that we need to overturn
and it lists reasonings
as one of those things.
Now that could include
our imperfect and distorted reasoning
about our value to Jehovah.
That reasoning might be so strongly entrenched
that we need to keep praying about it.
Keep studying.
Or as we mentioned earlier,
keep meditating on the ransom.
But as we gradually replace
the negative emotions
with elevated scriptural truths,
we'll be better able to move away
from that distorted mirror
and see ourselves
the way Jehovah does.
So to review,
how can we cope with negative emotions
that at times overwhelm us?
First, meditate on the ransom.
It is the most potent answer
to the satanic lie
that we are worthless
or unlovable to Jehovah.
Gradually replace
lowly negative thoughts
with elevated scriptural truths.
Truth that will help us
see ourselves the way Jehovah does.
Those two suggestions
can help us cope with negative emotions
that have become a plague
of our heart.
Now in conclusion, a final thought.
Whatever plays our heart,
even if it's a situation
that we haven't touched on this evening,
remaining spiritually active
will lighten our load.
Now we at Bethel are blessed
because we have plenty to do
in Jehovah's work.
And really, wherever we serve,
theocratic activity will balance our thinking
and help us to put the principles
we discussed into practice.
But our strongest means
of coping with any plague
of our heart is identified
at Psalm 62, one and two.
Let's read those verses.
David says at Psalm 62,
can lighten our load
and make it easier for us to carry.
Psalm 62, beginning with verse 1.
Indeed, I wait silently for God.
My salvation comes from Him.
Indeed, He is my rock
and my salvation,
my secure refuge.
I will never be greatly shaken.
Let's think about that last phrase.
What does that mean?
And how can it help us cope
with the plague of our heart?
Well, to illustrate that last year
my wife and I were on a flight
from El Paso to New York
when the plane hit turbulence.
And this was an ordinary turbulence.
This turbulence was so bad
that the pilot pulled the flight
attendance to sit down
and fasten her seat belts.
It was a nerve-wracking experience.
Obviously, we survived.
But a day or two later
I did some research.
And I found out something about turbulence
that many passengers don't know.
You know what it is?
It's that planes are built
to handle turbulence.
Even the really bad kind.
In fact, when the pilot says
he's searching for smoother air,
he's not doing it so much for our safety
as he is just for our comfort.
And to keep the coffee in our cups.
Turbulence might shake a plane,
but the plane will not be greatly shaken.
To cope with the plague of our heart,
we need to understand
something similar
about the turbulence going on in our life.
When we face a trial,
our tendency might be to panic
to grip the armrest, so to speak,
to worry about what the next moment
will burn.
And to worry about what the next moment
will bring
to fear that we're going to crash.
But we can have confidence
that as David said,
we will never be greatly shaken.
We can handle the turbulence of any trial
that comes our way.
And why?
Not because of our own strength.
But because we feel as David expresses
in verse two,
Jehovah is my rock
and my salvation,
by our trial.
But with Jehovah's help,
we will never be greatly shaken.
By all means, then,
whatever hardship we face,
whether it's circumstances
that discourage us,
people who upset us,
negative emotions that overwhelm us
or anything else,
let us continue to make Jehovah
our secure refuge,
confident that he can help us cope
with the plague of our heart.